SYLLABUS
ME EN 291: JOB FINDING
Fall 2025
Class Time and Zoom Link:
https://byu.zoom.us/j/94026717810
Th 11-11:50 (see dates below)
Instructors:
Dr. Brad Adams, brad.adams@byu.edu, Office EB 360-I, Office Hours by appointment
Tony Jewkes, tony_jewkes@byu.edu, Office EB 246, Office Hours by appointment
Texts:
The 2-Hour Job Search, Second Edition: Using Technology to Get the Right Job Faster (2nd Ed)
by Steve Dalton (required)
The 20-Minute Networking Meeting - Graduate Edition: Learn to Network. Get a Job.
by Nathan A. Perez (recommended)
Course Overview:
Welcome to ME 291: Job Finding. The purpose of this course is to help students find success in life by
learning detailed effective strategies for job finding. It is important for students to start their job search
early. The entire objective of this course is to help you learn how to implement the most efficient and
successful job search method we have found. This course will "teach you how to fish" so that when you
are looking for your next job (in about 5 years on average) you will be amazing at it then too. We want
our students to find the very best jobs for them.
The job search is extremely important, but very easy to procrastinate as there is no real pain until one
becomes desperate. And there is zero instant gratification because it takes months to see the fruits of
your labors. This course will provide structure to keep yourself moving toward your career goals.
Grading: Pass/Fail
Attendance is required at all classes. You must complete all assignments to receive a passing grade.
Schedule:
Date Topic Assignment
9/4 2-Hour Job Search Overview #1 List 40 Employers
9/11 STEM Fair Prep/Interviewing #1a List 3 companies
researched for STEM Fair
9/18 No Class – STEM Fair
9/25 Finish LAMP List: Prioritize Target Employers #2 Finish LAMP List: Prioritize
Target Employers
10/2 Contact and Recruit: Email, Track, Research, Interview (3B7) # 3 Initiate the 3B7 method
10/9 Follow Up and Continue (3B7): Informational Interviews #4 Follow-up & Continue 3B7
(General BYU Career Fair Day)
10/16 No Class – College Lecture
10/23 Contact, Recruit, Follow-Up (3B7): Support Teams #5 Informational Interview
10/30 Career Planning / Professionalism in the Workplace #6 Academic Career Goals\nCourse Outcomes
Career Planning - Students will develop a plan for their academic career that will facilitate obtaining
professional employment.
Interviewing - Students will be able to professionally communicate relevant interests, skills, and experiences in
an interview.
Job Search Skills - Students will learn and implement a proven networking technique for obtaining
employment.
Professionalism in the Workplace - Students will be familiar with professional expectations in the workplace,
including ethics, diversity, and communications.
Title IX
In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Brigham Young University prohibits
unlawful sex discrimination against any participant in its education programs or activities. The university also
prohibits sexual harassment—including sexual violence—committed by or against students, university
employees, and visitors to campus. As outlined in university policy, sexual harassment, dating violence,
domestic violence, sexual assault, and stalking are considered forms of "Sexual Misconduct" prohibited by the
university.
University policy requires all university employees in a teaching, managerial, or supervisory role to report all
incidents of Sexual Misconduct that come to their attention in any way, including but not limited to face-to-
face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class discussion, email, text, or social media
post. Incidents of Sexual Misconduct should be reported to the Title IX Coordinator
at t9coordinator@byu.edu or (801) 422-8692 or 1085 WSC. Reports may also be submitted through
EthicsPoint at the BYU Title IX website or 1-888-238-1062 (24-hours a day).
BYU offers confidential resources for those affected by Sexual Misconduct, including the university’s Victim
Advocate, as well as a number of non-confidential resources and services that may be helpful. Additional
information about Title IX, the university’s Sexual Misconduct Policy, reporting requirements, and resources
can be found at the BYU Title IX website or by contacting the university’s Title IX Coordinator.