10/18/25, 8:59 AM Syllabus · ME 415
ME 415
Flight Vehicle Design
Syllabus Schedule Resources
© 2025. All rights reserved.
Syllabus
Andrew Ning | Fall 2025
What is this course about?
The subject of this course is aircraft and rocket design. You will learn some of
the basics of aerodynamics, structures, stability, propulsion, and
performance as applied to flight vehicle design. In other words, you will be
exposed to the fundamentals of aerospace engineering. Rather than a deep
https://flow.byu.edu/me415/syllabus/ 1/12\n10/18/25, 8:59 AM Syllabus · ME 415
dive into any one discipline, our focus is understanding tradeoffs amongst
multiple disciplines to enable vehicle-level design. The class involves a
combination of theory, analytic methods, computational tools, and a hands-
on design project.
What is this project about?
After we’ve practiced fundamentals through homework assignments, we’ll
spend about 3 weeks building gliders in small teams. We’ll then spend a day
at the park playing “glider golf”. The project will give us a better feel for
aerodynamic tradeoffs and the importance of static stability.
How does this course relate to other courses?
The content of this class is the typical launching point for a mechanical
engineer wishing to specialize in aerospace engineering. Subsequent courses
provide greater depth on topics that we can only cover at an introductory
level in this class. See the aerospace emphasis (catalog will have latest class
options) for other classes in this area.
What are the prerequisites?
Formally, the listed prerequisites are: ME EN 273, ME EN 312. The latter may
be taken concurrently (but you may need to read ahead a bit or ask a
classmate to explain if unfamiliar concepts come up). We do not assume any
prior exposure to aircraft or spacecraft.
https://flow.byu.edu/me415/syllabus/ 2/12\n10/18/25, 8:59 AM Syllabus · ME 415
Some of you are from other departments, like physics. You’ll be fine, though
you should ask your classmates for help, as needed, in explaining some
engineering concepts or terminology from fluids, dynamics, and structures
that are re-used in this class.
What will the in-class experience be like?
Most classes will be oriented around self-discovery. I’d recommend that you
read the textbook or watch videos after lectures. Research suggests that
concepts will stick with you better if you wrestle with them before being
introduced to the “right way”. To that end, in class I will ask lots of
questions, ask you to predict things, draw charts, debate concepts with your
neighbor, or try to solve problems that you haven’t seen before.
What textbook will we use?
I’ve developed a text specifically for this class linked on the schedule page.
I’ve created this because there was no one textbook at the appropriate level
or with the right mix of topics for this class. The textbook may be updated
periodically.
Introduction to Flight by John Anderson (any edition) is a good
supplementary text. It is not necessary for the class, but will provide more
context for those interested. The level of that text is a bit too basic for our
needs, but does provide a nice introduction to a broad range of topics.
https://flow.byu.edu/me415/syllabus/ 3/12\n10/18/25, 8:59 AM Syllabus · ME 415
I’ve also created videos on topics from a prior year also linked on the
schedule page. I emphasize some topics differently, and have added some
new material, but most of the content overlaps if you want to review.
What are the assignments?
There will generally be an assignment due every Wednesday at midnight
(11:59pm) via Learning Suite. These will be submitted as a “quiz” on
Learning Suite, except that unlike normal quizzes you can open and exit as
much as you like before the deadline. Make sure what you submit is clear,
well-labeled, etc.
We will also have weekly quizzes to help you and I gauge understanding
and reinforce concepts. Quizzes will be low weight. You are allowed to take
a quiz twice. The first time should be closed-book. This helps you with
retrieval, a practice that promotes learning. The second time is open-book
and your score will be the best of the two attempts, which should be the
latter!
Besides the project, there are also two midterm exams and one
comprehensive final exam.
What about late work?
Late homework will be accepted with a penalty of 20% per day. Last minute
issues often happen in life so be sure to start your work early and submit
early! Despite your best planning you will likely have an unexpected event,
https://flow.byu.edu/me415/syllabus/ 4/12\n10/18/25, 8:59 AM Syllabus · ME 415
obligation, or illness pop up. To help with this, I will give you three free late
days (total per semester, not per assignment). This policy is designed to help
with unexpected issues, so we generally won’t grant other extensions (unless
of course there are prolonged/significant disruptions).
We won’t re-open late quizzes, but instead will drop two quizzes because we
all forget or have occasional emergencies.
Can I work with others? AI?
Working with others on homework is definitely encouraged, but you must
do your own analysis and your own write-ups. When working with
classmates, TAs, or AI, it is not appropriate to seek out solutions but rather
to reinforce understanding. When using AI, you should ask questions like
you would interact with a TA. For example, ask for feedback on your
approach, or prompt it to ask you guided questions to help you figure out a
problem. AI will not be allowed on exams.
University and Department Policies
Honor Code
In keeping with the principles of the BYU Honor Code, students are
expected to be honest in all of their academic work. Academic honesty
means, most fundamentally, that any work you present as your own must in
fact be your own work and not that of another. Violations of this principle
https://flow.byu.edu/me415/syllabus/ 5/12\n10/18/25, 8:59 AM Syllabus · ME 415
may result in a failing grade in the course and additional disciplinary action
by the university. Students are also expected to adhere to the Dress and
Grooming Standards. Adherence demonstrates respect for yourself and
others and ensures an effective learning and working environment. It is the
university’s expectation, and every instructor’s expectation in class, that
each student will abide by all Honor Code standards. Please call the Honor
Code Office at 422-2847 if you have questions about those standards.
Academic Honesty (Department)
As part of an overall teaching/learning approach to aid student learning, the
course instructor may make available to students solutions to some prior
coursework. However, outside of this appropriate usage, relying on and/or
copying solutions (obtained online or from any source) to assigned
coursework represents a clear example of turning in work that is not your
own.
Inappropriate Use Of Course Materials
All course materials (e.g., outlines, handouts, syllabi, exams, quizzes,
PowerPoint presentations, lectures, audio and video recordings, etc.) are
proprietary. Students are prohibited from posting or selling any such course
materials without the express written permission of the professor teaching
this course. To do so is a violation of the Brigham Young University Honor
Code.
Preventing & Responding to Sexual Misconduct
https://flow.byu.edu/me415/syllabus/ 6/12\n10/18/25, 8:59 AM Syllabus · ME 415
In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Brigham
Young University prohibits unlawful sex discrimination against any
participant in its education programs or activities. The university also
prohibits sexual harassment-including sexual violence-committed by or
against students, university employees, and visitors to campus. As outlined
in university policy, sexual harassment, dating violence, domestic violence,
sexual assault, and stalking are considered forms of “Sexual Misconduct”
prohibited by the university.
University policy requires all university employees in a teaching,
managerial, or supervisory role to report all incidents of Sexual Misconduct
that come to their attention in any way, including but not limited to face-to-
face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class discussion,
email, text, or social media post. Incidents of Sexual Misconduct should be
reported to the Title IX Coordinator at t9coordinator@byu.edu or (801) 422-
8692. Reports may also be submitted through EthicsPoint at
https://titleix.byu.edu/report or 1-888-238-1062 (24-hours a day).
BYU offers confidential resources for those affected by Sexual Misconduct,
including the university’s Victim Advocate, as well as a number of non-
confidential resources and services that may be helpful. Additional
information about Title IX, the university’s Sexual Misconduct Policy,
reporting requirements, and resources can be found at http://titleix.byu.edu
or by contacting the university’s Title IX Coordinator.
https://flow.byu.edu/me415/syllabus/ 7/12\n10/18/25, 8:59 AM Syllabus · ME 415
Student Disability
Brigham Young University is committed to providing a working and
learning atmosphere that reasonably accommodates qualified persons with
disabilities. If you have any disability which may impair your ability to
complete this course successfully, please contact the University Accessibility
Center (UAC), 2170 WSC or 422-2767. Reasonable academic
accommodations are reviewed for all students who have qualified,
documented disabilities. The UAC can also assess students for learning,
attention, and emotional concerns. Services are coordinated with the student
and instructor by the UAC. If you need assistance or if you feel you have
been unlawfully discriminated against on the basis of disability, you may
seek resolution through established grievance policy and procedures by
contacting the Equal Employment Office at 422-5895, D-285 ASB.
Respectful Environment
“Sadly, from time to time, we do hear reports of those who are at best
insensitive and at worst insulting in their comments to and about others…
We hear derogatory and sometimes even defamatory comments about those
with different political, athletic, or ethnic views or experiences. Such
behavior is completely out of place at BYU, and I enlist the aid of all to
monitor carefully and, if necessary, correct any such that might occur here,
however inadvertent or unintentional. “I worry particularly about
demeaning comments made about the career or major choices of women or
men either directly or about members of the BYU community generally. We
https://flow.byu.edu/me415/syllabus/ 8/12\n10/18/25, 8:59 AM Syllabus · ME 415
must remember that personal agency is a fundamental principle and that
none of us has the right or option to criticize the lawful choices of another.”
President Cecil O. Samuelson, Annual University Conference, August 24,
2010 “Occasionally, we … hear reports that our female faculty feel
disrespected, especially by students, for choosing to work at BYU, even
though each one has been approved by the BYU Board of Trustees. Brothers
and sisters, these things ought not to be. Not here. Not at a university that
shares a constitution with the School of the Prophets.” Vice President John S.
Tanner, Annual University Conference, August 24, 2010
Devotional Attendance
Brigham Young University’s devotional and forum assemblies are an
important part of your BYU experience. President Cecil O. Samuelson said,
“We have special and enlightening series of devotional and forum
assemblies…that will complement, supplement, and enrich what will also be
a very productive period in your classrooms, laboratories, and libraries. We
look forward to being with you each Tuesday…and hope that you will
regularly attend and bring your friends and associates with you…A large
part of what constitutes the unique ‘BYU experience’ is found in these
gatherings where the Spirit has been invited and where we have the
opportunity to discuss and consider things of ultimate worth and
importance that are not afforded to the academic community on almost any
other campus” (from the address “The Legacy of Learning”, 30 August,
2005). Your attendance at each forum and devotional is strongly encouraged.
https://flow.byu.edu/me415/syllabus/ 9/12\n10/18/25, 8:59 AM Syllabus · ME 415
Mental Health
Mental health concerns and stressful life events can affect students’
academic performance and quality of life. BYU Counseling and
Psychological Services (CAPS, 1500 WSC, 801-422-3035, caps.byu.edu)
provides individual, couples, and group counseling, as well as stress
management services. These services are confidential and are provided by
the university at no cost for full-time students. For general information
please visit https://caps.byu.edu; for more immediate concerns please visit
http://help.byu.edu.
Academic Honesty
The first injunction of the Honor Code is the call to “be honest.” Students
come to the university not only to improve their minds, gain knowledge,
and develop skills that will assist them in their life’s work, but also to build
character. “President David O. McKay taught that character is the highest
aim of education” (The Aims of a BYU Education, p.6). It is the purpose of
the BYU Academic Honesty Policy to assist in fulfilling that aim. BYU
students should seek to be totally honest in their dealings with others. They
should complete their own work and be evaluated based upon that work.
They should avoid academic dishonesty and misconduct in all its forms,
including but not limited to plagiarism, fabrication or falsification, cheating,
and other academic misconduct.
Plagiarism
https://flow.byu.edu/me415/syllabus/ 10/12\n10/18/25, 8:59 AM Syllabus · ME 415
Intentional plagiarism is a form of intellectual theft that violates widely
recognized principles of academic integrity as well as the Honor Code. Such
plagiarism may subject the student to appropriate disciplinary action
administered through the university Honor Code Office, in addition to
academic sanctions that may be applied by an instructor. Inadvertent
plagiarism, which may not be a violation of the Honor Code, is nevertheless
a form of intellectual carelessness that is unacceptable in the academic
community. Plagiarism of any kind is completely contrary to the established
practices of higher education where all members of the university are
expected to acknowledge the original intellectual work of others that is
included in their own work. In some cases, plagiarism may also involve
violations of copyright law. Intentional Plagiarism-Intentional plagiarism is
the deliberate act of representing the words, ideas, or data of another as
one’s own without providing proper attribution to the author through
quotation, reference, or footnote. Inadvertent Plagiarism-Inadvertent
plagiarism involves the inappropriate, but non-deliberate, use of another’s
words, ideas, or data without proper attribution. Inadvertent plagiarism
usually results from an ignorant failure to follow established rules for
documenting sources or from simply not being sufficiently careful in
research and writing. Although not a violation of the Honor Code,
inadvertent plagiarism is a form of academic misconduct for which an
instructor can impose appropriate academic sanctions. Students who are in
doubt as to whether they are providing proper attribution have the
responsibility to consult with their instructor and obtain guidance. Examples
https://flow.byu.edu/me415/syllabus/ 11/12\n10/18/25, 8:59 AM Syllabus · ME 415
of plagiarism include: Direct Plagiarism-The verbatim copying of an original
source without acknowledging the source. Paraphrased Plagiarism-The
paraphrasing, without acknowledgement, of ideas from another that the
reader might mistake for the author’s own. Plagiarism Mosaic-The
borrowing of words, ideas, or data from an original source and blending this
original material with one’s own without acknowledging the source.
Insufficient Acknowledgement-The partial or incomplete attribution of
words, ideas, or data from an original source. Plagiarism may occur with
respect to unpublished as well as published material. Copying another
student’s work and submitting it as one’s own individual work without
proper attribution is a serious form of plagiarism.
https://flow.byu.edu/me415/syllabus/ 12/12