9/8/25, 5:30 PM Syllabus for ACC 200-002: Principles of Accounting
Course Syllabus
 Edit
Accounting 200 | Course Syllabus
Introduction | Learning Objectives | Required Materials | Course Logistics | Keys to Success
| Accounting Labs and TA Help | Exams | Professionalism | Grading | Illness (including
COVID) Accommodations | Other Policies
Welcome to ACC 200!
The vision of BYU Marriott is to “transform the world through Christlike leadership.” We aim to
“develop leaders of faith, intellect, and character.” To do so, we focus on four core values, which we
hope you will strive to undertake as you participate in this course:
1. Faith in Jesus Christ
We value deep and abiding faith in Jesus Christ. Our faith gives us the capacity to envision a better
future, the confidence to make that future happen, and the courage to act in the face of challenges.
2. Integrity in Action
We value integrity and hold ourselves to the highest moral and ethical standards. Acting with
integrity builds trust, strengthens character, and focuses our ambitions on things of eternal
consequence.
3. Respect for All
We value respect for all individuals as children of God and recognize the inherent worth, divine
potential, and agency of each person. A climate of respect and belonging enhances our learning,
facilitates collaboration, and encourages personal growth.
4. Excellence
We value excellence in learning, teaching, research, management, and leadership. An expectation
of excellence magnifies our influence and motivates us to continually improve.
ACC 200 is an excellent introduction to the world of business. Accounting is sometimes
referred to as the language of business because its very purpose is to provide meaningful
https://byu.instructure.com/courses/30123/assignments/syllabus 1/13
9/8/25, 5:30 PM Syllabus for ACC 200-002: Principles of Accounting
information to managers, investors, creditors, and government agencies with interest in a
business.
Part of becoming a skilled manager, investor, or lender includes understanding accounting as it
hones your ability to make well-informed decisions. In some respects, ACC 200 is a “principles of
business class” because you will need to understand what a business is and how it operates to
account for its activities properly. You must also know how to generate and interpret relevant
financial information to navigate through the world of business successfully.
Course Learning Outcomes
In addition to offering experiences that can facilitate character development and give you the
opportunity to put the BYU Marriott Values into practice, after taking this course, you should be
able to do the following:
1. Apply the Marriott Values to class and peer interactions to improve learning and the
experience in ACC 200 for yourself and others. (Christlike leadership and character
development)
2. Interpret and analyze the primary financial statements, including the balance sheet, income
statement, statement of cash flows, and statement of equity. (excellence in technical
knowledge)
3. Use internal accounting tools such as product costing, cost-profit-volume analysis, non-routine
decision, and the balanced scorecard analyses to understand how to make better business
management decisions. (excellence in technical knowledge)
4. Manage workload in a self-paced learning environment by meeting regular deadlines. (integrity
in action)
Top of Page
Required Materials
There is no textbook for this course, but there is a required course packet to purchase at the
bookstore.
You will need a basic calculator for exams. You can use any calculator, other than your phone,
while taking exams. If you go on to take additional accounting or business classes, you will need a
financial calculator. The HP 10bII+ is an inexpensive and effective option that will work for all of
your business classes.
Course Logistics
Pre-Class Work
https://byu.instructure.com/courses/30123/assignments/syllabus 2/13
9/8/25, 5:30 PM Syllabus for ACC 200-002: Principles of Accounting
Each week you will work through a module on Canvas. A module includes a review quiz, lesson
content, activities, and a module quiz. Everything in the module is due BEFORE we meet together
as a class. See the course schedule on the home page for specific deadlines.
Review Quiz: Each week (with the exception of the first two modules), you will take a review
quiz that will review content from previous weeks. I want you to practice what you have already
learned before I add more information. You have unlimited attempts on these review quizzes,
before the deadline, and Canvas will keep your highest score. I will drop one review quiz in
determining your final score.
Lesson Content: To learn new content, you will watch videos and have opportunities to apply
what you learn through self-check questions and interactive activities. The self-check questions
are not graded, but are provided to give you practice to prepare for the graded quizzes and
exams. You should set aside adequate time each day to go through the videos. Your ability to
learn the online material by being engaged and doing what is asked will help you develop life-
long learning habits, skills and abilities. You will see that the videos can be sped up to twice the
normal speed. I recognize that most of you will take advantage of this time-saver, but I suggest
staying within the 1X to 1.75X range. At 2X speed, it becomes difficult to keep up with the
chipmunk talking. Dropping down to 0.5X is extremely unpleasant and not recommended.
Applications of Accounting Assignments: Through this course, you will complete several
assignments to help you apply the accounting concepts you learn to real-world scenarios.
These assignments address a variety of current accounting-related topics. I will provide detailed
instructions for each of these assignments in the weekly module pages. Your grade will depend
on the completion and content of your submission. I will drop two application of accounting
assignments in determining your final score.
Module Quiz: Each module will have a graded module quiz to assess your understanding of
the content. You will have 59 minutes to complete each quiz, although they are designed to
take 15–20 minutes. These quizzes are open-book, meaning you may reference anything on
Canvas or your own notes. You may not work with anyone while taking the quiz, and you get
only one attempt at it. I will drop two module quizzes in determining your final score. The
correct answers and feedback for the quizzes will be made available 30 minutes after the
deadline (you can go back and review the quiz to access this information).
Note: If you miss a quiz, you will not be able to access the quiz (Canvas doesn't allow it after the
deadline). However, you can still review the quiz by going to the TA lab. The TAs can access the
quiz for you to review (not for points).
Class Time
https://byu.instructure.com/courses/30123/assignments/syllabus 3/13
9/8/25, 5:30 PM Syllabus for ACC 200-002: Principles of Accounting
We will meet together as a class (as outlined on the home page of Canvas) to practice what you
have learned, answer questions, and learn some new concepts not covered in the videos.
Attendance is required, but class participation is not tracked. The material we cover in class will be
on exams.
Top of Page
Syllabus Quiz
The first week of classes, you will complete a syllabus quiz. This quiz will assess your
understanding of the information contained in this syllabus. This quiz includes true or false and
multiple-choice questions that encourage you to read and understand these course policies. You
have unlimited attempts to take this quiz, and you may refer to the syllabus as you take the quiz.
You cannot drop this quiz, and you should not move on in the course without completing it.
Quiz Deadlines and Cautions
Quizzes and assignments will not be reopened and deadlines will not be extended (unless you
have accommodations from the university accommodations center). With that in mind, please note
the following:
Do not click on a quiz until you are ready to take the quiz.
For timed quizzes (module quizzes have a 59 minute limit), ensure you have enough time to
finish the quiz in one sitting.
Make sure are clicking on the correct quiz or discussion board.
Make sure you have a stable internet connection.
However, even taking the necessary precautions, there will be some circumstances that are
beyond your control. To help with some of these uncontrollable situations, I will drop one review
quiz, two module quizzes, and one application of accounting assignment in determining final
grades. Drops are automatically applied to your lowest scores in these categories.
Top of Page
Keys to Success in ACC 200
ACC 200 is not a class that requires proficiency in higher math. Although accounting and business
finance are numbers-oriented studies, the math involved is elementary (literally just addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division). What is essential in the study of accounting and business
is the ability to organize and analyze information. Business language and terms have carefully
defined meanings, and proper business communication requires the precise use of these terms. An
https://byu.instructure.com/courses/30123/assignments/syllabus 4/13
9/8/25, 5:30 PM Syllabus for ACC 200-002: Principles of Accounting
ability to read and communicate with clarity is not only critical to success in this class, but also
success in the world of business.
A high level of self-discipline is required to complete this course. You cannot afford to get
behind.
I strongly recommend you set up a personal study schedule that regularly earmarks specific times
when you will work on the material for this class. University expectation is for every hour in a class
period, either in class or online, you spend two to three hours outside of class working on the
material.
Course Communication
The university requires that all course communication be sent to your BYU email address.
Important announcements (sent to your BYU email) will be sent regularly to help you be successful
in the course. Please make sure you are checking your BYU email regularly (at least once a day).
If you are unsure how to access your BYU email, please contact OIT (https://oit.byu.edu/
(https://oit.byu.edu/) ).
Accounting Labs and TA Assistance
We have both an online and in-person accounting lab to help you with the course. The accounting
lab holds open office hours, meaning there is no need to schedule an appointment to visit. Any time
you have a question, just log online or walk into the lab to get your questions answered.
Information and hours for the accounting lab are on the home page of the course.
You can also email the TAs at ACC200@byu.edu (mailto:ACC200@byu.edu) . Do not use
Canvas’s built-in messaging feature to communicate with the TAs, as this may significantly
delay their ability to provide you with a response.
Top of Page
Chat GPT
As technology continues to advance, we are pleased to introduce ChatGPT, a state-of-the-art
language model that can answer some of your accounting questions. It's worth noting that while
ChatGPT is an excellent resource for answering general accounting questions, it should not be
relied upon for calculations or highly specific accounting issues. ChatGPT is a language model and
is therefore not very accurate with calculations. Therefore, if you choose to use ChatGPT, please
do so with caution and always double-check its responses against authoritative sources to ensure
the accuracy of your calculations and analyses.
More importantly, while ChatGPT is a valuable resource, it should not be used as a substitute for
your own learning and understanding. Therefore, please note that ChatGPT should not be used
https://byu.instructure.com/courses/30123/assignments/syllabus 5/13
9/8/25, 5:30 PM Syllabus for ACC 200-002: Principles of Accounting
for quizzes or assessments, as doing so would not allow you to develop the critical thinking
and problem-solving skills necessary for success in the field of accounting.
Exams
You will take a total of three exams: two midterm exams and one comprehensive final exam. You
must take the exams during the examination period outlined in the schedule. Every exam question
is in the multiple-choice format. You will only be able to take the exams in person at the BYU
Testing Center (including the Salt Lake Center). There is no way to take the exams outside
of the testing center, so you must plan to be here in person to take the exams. You can
access more information about each exam on Canvas.
Second- and Third-Chance Exams
In an effort to encourage you to master accounting concepts by learning from your mistakes, you
have the opportunity to take exams a second and third time in this course. The maximum grade
you can achieve on a second or third chance exam is 75% (i.e., if you score 90% on your 2nd
or 3rd attempt, I will cap it at 75%; if you score 70%, your score is not capped). Second and third
attempts of the exam are not the same as the regular exam, but a different version of the exam.
Taking these exams is optional, but they serve as an excellent opportunity to improve your
accounting abilities. Your final exam score will be the highest of your three exams (with your 2nd
and 3rd attempt being capped at 75%). Please see the schedule on Canvas for the exam window
for first and second chance exams.
Professionalism
The Marriott School of Business is one of the professional colleges on campus. Accordingly, I
expect you will act professionally with each other and the TAs. Professionalism points form part of
your final grade. As I expect everyone to interact professionally, you will start the semester with full
credit for professionalism points. You don’t need to earn professionalism points, but you can lose
some based on behaviors contrary to the following activities included as a part of being
professional.
Professionalism includes the following:
Being courteous, respectful, and helpful to your peers, TAs, and faculty.
Asking questions if you need help and being willing to offer assistance to others where needed.
Checking the syllabus, the class schedule, assignment instructions, class slides, and
announcements on Canvas before asking the TAs or your instructor. You may be able to
answer your question with the information already provided on Canvas. If you have any
personal concerns, please directly reach out to your instructor.
https://byu.instructure.com/courses/30123/assignments/syllabus 6/13
9/8/25, 5:30 PM Syllabus for ACC 200-002: Principles of Accounting
Taking responsibility for your learning, including coming prepared to class and being excited to
participate in in-class activities actively.
Top of Page
Grading
Your grade in ACC 200 will follow this breakdown:
Exams (60%)
Exam 1 14%
Exam 2 18%
Exam 3 (comprehensive final) 28%
Quizzes (30%)
Syllabus Quiz 1%
Review Quizzes (1 dropped) 12%
Module Quizzes (2 dropped) 17%
Other (10%)
Application of Accounting Assignments (2 dropped) 8%
Professionalism 2%
Total 100%
Anticipated Grading Scale
Note that there are NO make-up or grade improvement projects in this class. This scale reflects the
anticipated break down for ACC 200 grades. I reserve the right to adjust the scale.
Grade Percent Grade Percent
A 94% C 74%
A- 90% C- 70%
B+ 87% D+ 67%
B 84% D 64%
B- 80% D- 50%
C+ 77% E Below 50%
Top of Page
Illness (including COVID) Accommodations
https://byu.instructure.com/courses/30123/assignments/syllabus 7/13
9/8/25, 5:30 PM Syllabus for ACC 200-002: Principles of Accounting
If you are unable to meet any quiz deadlines in the course due to COVID or other illnesses, you will
first need to use the drops that are allowed to accommodate these uncontrollable circumstances. If
you have any long-term COVID or illness symptoms (longer than a week) you will need to work
with the University Accessibility Center (https://uac.byu.edu/) to be granted longer term
accommodations. This will ensure students with similar situations and concerns get treated
consistently. If you become sick during an examination period, I can extend the exam deadline with
either of the following:
1. A positive COVID test
2. A doctor's note excusing you from course work due to your illness
With this information in mind, I am going to encourage you to look ahead and work ahead early
each week to allow you the most flexibility to meet deadlines. Additionally, please do your best to
keep yourself healthy so that you can have a successful semester.
Other Policies
Marriott School Inclusion Statement
At Brigham Young University’s Marriott School of Business, we embrace the university’s mission to
“assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life.” We strive to foster an environment
that is respectful of all backgrounds, perspectives, and voices, that “all may be edified of all” (D&C
88:122). By extending a spirit of consideration, fellowship, and charity to everyone, we enable the
discovery of common values and unique insights as we each pursue our worthy secular and
spiritual goals.
Top of Page
1. Brigham Young University. Accommodation of Persons with Disabilities at BYU Policy
(https://policy.byu.edu/view/index.php?p=13) . October 28, 2005.

BYU Online Policies
Statement on Belonging
We are united by our common primary identity as children of God (Acts 17:29; Psalm 82:6) and our
commitment to the truths of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ (BYU Mission Statement). We
https://byu.instructure.com/courses/30123/assignments/syllabus 8/13
9/8/25, 5:30 PM Syllabus for ACC 200-002: Principles of Accounting
strive to create a community of belonging composed of students, faculty, and staff whose hearts
are knit together in love (Mosiah 18:21) where
all relationships reflect devout love of God and a loving, genuine concern for the welfare of our
neighbor (BYU Mission Statement);
we value and embrace the variety of individual characteristics, life experiences and
circumstances, perspectives, talents, and gifts of each member of the community and the
richness and strength they bring to our community (1 Corinthians 12:12–27);
our interactions create and support an environment of belonging (Ephesians 2:19); and
the full realization of each student’s divine potential is our central focus (BYU Mission
Statement).
Honor Code
In keeping with the principles of the BYU Honor Code, students are expected to be honest in all of
their academic work. Academic honesty means, most fundamentally, that any work you present as
your own must in fact be your own work and not that of another. Violations of this principle may
result in a failing grade in the course and additional disciplinary action by the university. Students
are also expected to adhere to the Dress and Grooming Standards. Adherence demonstrates
respect for yourself and others and ensures an effective learning and working environment. It is the
university's expectation, and my own expectation in class, that each student will abide by all Honor
Code standards. Please call the Honor Code Office at 801-422-2847 (tel:8014222847) if you have
questions about those standards.
Preventing and Responding to Sexual Misconduct
Brigham Young University prohibits all forms of sexual harassment—including sexual assault,
dating violence, domestic violence, and stalking on the basis of sex—by its personnel and students
and in all its education programs or activities. University policy requires all faculty members to
promptly report incidents of sexual harassment that come to their attention in any way and
encourages reports by students who experience or become aware of sexual harassment. Incidents
should be reported to the Title IX Coordinator at title9@byu.edu (mailto:title9@byu.edu) or 801-
422-8692 (tel:8014228692) or 1320 WSC. Reports may also be submitted online to the Title IX
Office (https://titleix.byu.edu/report) or by calling 1-888-238-1062 (tel:18882381062) (24 hours a
day). BYU offers a number of resources and services for those affected by sexual harassment. If
you or someone you know has experienced sexual assault, BYU’s Sexual Assault Survivor
Advocacy Services (SASAS) can help. SASAS can provide information, support, and connection to
the resources you may need. SASAS services are free and confidential.
SASAS Contact Information
https://byu.instructure.com/courses/30123/assignments/syllabus 9/13
9/8/25, 5:30 PM Syllabus for ACC 200-002: Principles of Accounting
Phone: 801.422.9071
Email: advocate@byu.edu
Web: https://advocates.byu.edu/
Location: 1500 WSC
National Sexual Assault Hotline: 1-800-656-4673
Additional information about sexual harassment, the university's Sexual Harassment Policy,
reporting requirements, and resources can be found in the University Catalog, by visiting the Title
IX Office website (http://titleix.byu.edu/) , or by contacting the university's Title IX Coordinator.
Student Disability
Brigham Young University is committed to providing a working and learning atmosphere that
reasonably accommodates qualified persons with disabilities. If you have any disability which may
impair your ability to complete this course successfully, please contact the University Accessibility
Center (UAC) located at 2170 WSC, or call 801-422-2767 (tel:8014222767) . Reasonable academic
accommodations are reviewed for all students who have qualified, documented disabilities. The
UAC can also assess students for learning, attention, and emotional concerns. Services are
coordinated with the student and instructor by the UAC. If you need assistance or if you feel you
have been unlawfully discriminated against on the basis of disability, you may seek resolution
through established grievance policy and procedures by contacting the Equal Employment Office
at 801-422-5895 (tel:8014225895) , D-285 ASB.
In this spirit, BYU Online aspires to improve web accessibility for users. While not required by law,
the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 Levels A and AA provide a wide range of
helpful recommendations to make web content more accessible. BYU Online strives to apply
WCAG 2.0 recommendations where feasible but may deviate from any recommendations that
would result in an undue hardship to BYU Online or alterations to program and course content and
objectives. If you have questions about accessibility, or if you need to report problems with any
accessibility features, please see our Accessibilities and Accommodations Web Page.
(https://is.byu.edu/support/accommodations&sa=D&ust=1567809961599000)
Academic Honesty
The first injunction of the Honor Code is the call to be honest. Students come to the university not
only to improve their minds, gain knowledge, and develop skills that will assist them in their life's
work, but also to build character. "President David O. McKay taught that character is the highest
aim of education" ("The Aims of a BYU Education," p. 6). It is the purpose of the BYU Academic
Honesty Policy to assist in fulfilling that aim. BYU students should seek to be totally honest in their
dealings with others. They should complete their own work and be evaluated based on that work.
https://byu.instructure.com/courses/30123/assignments/syllabus 10/13
9/8/25, 5:30 PM Syllabus for ACC 200-002: Principles of Accounting
They should avoid academic dishonesty and misconduct in all its forms, including but not limited to
plagiarism, fabrication or falsification, cheating, and other academic misconduct.
Plagiarism
Intentional plagiarism is a form of intellectual theft that violates widely recognized principles of
academic integrity as well as the Honor Code. Such plagiarism may subject the student to
appropriate disciplinary action administered through the university Honor Code Office, in addition to
academic sanctions that may be applied by an instructor. Inadvertent plagiarism, which may not be
a violation of the Honor Code, is nevertheless a form of intellectual carelessness that is
unacceptable in the academic community. Plagiarism of any kind is completely contrary to the
established practices of higher education where all members of the university are expected to
acknowledge the original intellectual work of others that is included in their own work. In some
cases, plagiarism may also involve violations of copyright law. Intentional plagiarism is the
deliberate act of representing the words, ideas, or data of another as one's own without providing
proper attribution to the author through quotation, reference, or footnote. Inadvertent plagiarism
involves the inappropriate, but non-deliberate, use of another's words, ideas, or data without proper
attribution. Inadvertent plagiarism usually results from an ignorant failure to follow established rules
for documenting sources or from simply not being sufficiently careful in research and writing.
Although not a violation of the Honor Code, inadvertent plagiarism is a form of academic
misconduct for which an instructor can impose appropriate academic sanctions. Students who are
in doubt as to whether they are providing proper attribution have the responsibility to consult with
their instructor and obtain guidance. Examples of plagiarism include the following:
Direct Plagiarism: The verbatim copying of an original source without acknowledging the
source.
Paraphrased Plagiarism: The paraphrasing, without acknowledgment, of ideas from another
that the reader might mistake for the author's own.
Plagiarism Mosaic: The borrowing of words, ideas, or data from an original source and blending
this original material with one's own without acknowledging the source.
Insufficient Acknowledgement: The partial or incomplete attribution of words, ideas, or data
from an original source.
Plagiarism may occur with respect to unpublished as well as published material. Copying another
student's work and submitting it as one's own individual work without proper attribution is a serious
form of plagiarism.
Respectful Environment
"Sadly, from time to time, we do hear reports of those who are at best insensitive and at worst
insulting in their comments to and about others. . . . We hear derogatory and sometimes even
https://byu.instructure.com/courses/30123/assignments/syllabus 11/13
9/8/25, 5:30 PM Syllabus for ACC 200-002: Principles of Accounting
defamatory comments about those with different political, athletic, or ethnic views or experiences.
Such behavior is completely out of place at BYU, and I enlist the aid of all to monitor carefully and,
if necessary, correct any such that might occur here, however inadvertent or unintentional. I worry
particularly about demeaning comments made about the career or major choices of women or men
either directly or about members of the BYU community generally. We must remember that
personal agency is a fundamental principle and that none of us has the right or option to criticize
the lawful choices of another." —President Cecil O. Samuelson, Annual University Conference,
August 24, 2010
"Occasionally, we . . . hear reports that our female faculty feel disrespected, especially by students,
for choosing to work at BYU, even though each one has been approved by the BYU Board of
Trustees. Brothers and sisters, these things ought not to be. Not here. Not at a university that
shares a constitution with the School of the Prophets." —Vice President John S. Tanner, Annual
University Conference, August 24, 2010
Mental Health Concerns
Mental health concerns and stressful life events can affect students' academic performance and
quality of life. BYU Counseling and Psychological Services (1500 WSC, 801-422-3035
(tel:8014223035) ) provides individual, couples, and group counseling, as well as stress
management services. These services are confidential and are provided by the university at no
cost to full-time students. For general information please visit the BYU Counseling and
Psychological Services website (https://caps.byu.edu) ; for more immediate concerns please
visit the Helping Distressed Students at BYU web page (http://help.byu.edu/) .
Inappropriate Use of Course Materials
All course materials (e.g., outlines, handouts, syllabi, exams, quizzes, PowerPoint presentations,
lectures, or audio and video recordings) are proprietary. Students are prohibited from posting or
selling any such course materials without the express written permission of the professor teaching
this course. To do so is a violation of the Brigham Young University Honor Code.
The materials used in connection with this online course are only for the use of students enrolled in
this course for purposes associated with this course and may not be retained or further
disseminated. Any copying or further dissemination of these materials may be subject to applicable
U.S. copyright laws. For questions or more information, please visit the BYU Copyright Licensing
Office (https://sites.lib.byu.edu/copyright/&sa=D&ust=1567809961601000) website.
"Members of the BYU community who willfully disregard this Copyright Policy or the BYU Copyright
Guidelines place themselves individually at risk of legal action and may incur personal liability for
their conduct. The unauthorized use or distribution of copyrighted material, including unauthorized
https://byu.instructure.com/courses/30123/assignments/syllabus 12/13
9/8/25, 5:30 PM Syllabus for ACC 200-002: Principles of Accounting
peer-to-peer file sharing, may subject individuals to civil and criminal liabilities, including actual and
statutory damages, costs and fees of litigation, fines, and imprisonment. . . .
Violations of the Copyright Policy may result in university disciplinary action including termination of
university enrollment or employment" (Excerpt taken from the BYU Copyright Policy
(https://policy.byu.edu/view/index.php?p=36) ).
https://byu.instructure.com/courses/30123/assignments/syllabus 13/13