ACC 401 Syllabus
Fall 2025
Professor William G. Heninger
Office: Tanner Building 5th Floor Office 530
Office Phone: (801) 422-6899
Email: heninger@byu.edu
Office Hours: Tuesday & Thursday 3:30 pm – 5:00 pm and by appointment
Professor Jeffrey Pickerd
Office: Tanner Building 5th Floor Office 521
Office Phone: (801) 422-0155
Email: jeffrey.pickerd@byu.edu
Office Hours: Tuesday & Thursday 3:30 pm – 5:00 pm and by appointment
Required Text and Materials:
Romney, Steinbart, Summers & Wood, Accounting Information Systems (16th Ed.) Pearson 2024
Arens and Dewey, System Understanding Aid 10th Ed. Armond Dalton Publishers 2020
The Romney, Steinbart, Summers and Wood text is included in the bookstore's Inclusive Access
Program. This program grants you access to your required course materials by the first day of
class at a discounted rate. Your student account will be charged this discounted rate after the
add/drop period. If for any reason you decide to purchase your materials elsewhere you can opt-
out of this program by the add/drop deadline and your account will not be charged.
Catalog Course Description:
Inputs, processing, outputs, and files of several transaction-processing subsystems. Foundation
for understanding internal control. Variety of tools used to design, create, or document
accounting information systems (AIS) to achieve organizational objectives.
Extended Course Description:
Welcome to the world of business processes as represented by the flows of data through the
organization. These flows of data typically originate with transactions of one form or another.
The flows of data are ultimately aggregated to form representations about the organization.
These representations are of significant importance for the decision makers within the business
and for participants in our capital markets based economy. Assuring that the flows of data are
properly collected, stored and processed into meaningful information is the responsibility of
accounting professionals.
The control environment of the business is discussed. We will look at this environment from a
corporate perspective and then again from an information systems perspective. Examining
control environments necessarily involves assessing the risks that a business faces and the
controls set to mitigate those risks. Management’s information needs will also be a prime object
of conversation and consideration.
Course Purpose:
This course is designed to provide accounting professionals with the information, skills, and
insights that they will need to use, manage, and ultimately evaluate the information systems that
must provide reliable and timely information to organizational stakeholders. Much of the
material for the course comes from professional standards; principally COBIT and COSO.
Course Goals
• Understand the transaction processing systems that are common to most businesses.
• Understand the control environment and control frameworks that are relevant to an
accounting information system.
Competencies and Learning Outcomes:
• Analyze a set of business processes and report control deficiencies
o Evaluated through the cycle reports, homework, quizzes, and exams.
• Learn how to evaluate the appropriateness of various controls
o Evaluated through homework, quizzes, and exams.
• Learn data visualization and Excel to support accounting decision making
o Evaluated through homework, quizzes, and exams
• Communicate effectively both in writing and in presentations
o Evaluated through cycle presentations, cycle reports, and data visualizations
• Develop the Christlike attributes necessary to work in teams
o Evaluated through peer evaluations
• Serve the community by applying the principles taught in class
o Evaluated through cycle presentations and cycle reports
• Learn how integrity and accountability are important spiritual and accounting principles
o Evaluated through homework, quizzes, and exams
Participation:
We expect each of you to participate in this educational experience. If you come to class without
having prepared by reading, you will not be able to contribute. Please bring thoughtful questions
to class. Come prepared to challenge the material and apply it to live scenarios.
Point Allocation*:
Exam 1 165
Exam 2 200
Final Exam 250
Quizzes 16+ @ 10 pts (drop 2-3) 140
Homework 50
Excel & Data Visualization 50
Cycle Project 60
Waren Case 85
TOTAL 1,000
*The point allocation is subject to change.
Assignment Preparation:
All reports, appeals, memos, assignments, etc. should be written with a word processor and have
a professional appearance. Unless otherwise noted, all assignments will be turned in via Canvas.
Professionalism:
Unprofessional behavior outside of the classroom or any time during the Jr. Core “year” can
affect your professionalism score in your Jr. Core classes.
Classroom Policies
We abide by all Marriot School classroom policies. These are available for review at
https://marriottschool.byu.edu/policies/classroom/