Accounting Junior Core
Financial– Accounting 403
Fall 2025 Syllabus
Welcome to the Junior Core! We are glad that you are part of the SOA and Marriott School of Business
family. The vision of BYU Marriott is to “transform the world through Christlike leadership.” We aim
to “develop leaders of faith, intellect, and character.” To do so, we focus on four core values, which we
hope you will strive to undertake as you participate in the Junior Core:
1. Faith in Jesus Christ
We value deep and abiding faith in Jesus Christ. Our faith gives us the capacity to envision a better future, the
confidence to make that future happen, and the courage to act in the face of challenges.
2. Integrity in Action
We value integrity and hold ourselves to the highest moral and ethical standards. Acting with integrity builds trust,
strengthens character, and focuses our ambitions on things of eternal consequence.
3. Respect for All
We value respect for all individuals as children of God and recognize the inherent worth, divine potential, and agency
of each person. A climate of respect and belonging enhances our learning, facilitates collaboration, and encourages
personal growth.
4. Excellence
We value excellence in learning, teaching, research, management, and leadership. An expectation of excellence
magnifies our influence and motivates us to continually improve.
COURSE PURPOSE
In addition to offering experiences that can facilitate character development and give you the opportunity
to put the BYU Marriott Values into practice, after taking this course, students should be able to:
1. work effectively in a group and independently to manage workload and meet regularly scheduled
deadlines,
2. analyze complex economic events to identify and extract relevant information necessary to
record technical accounting transactions with transparency and accuracy in accordance with U.S.
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles,
3. demonstrate understanding of recent accounting and regulatory updates,
4. critically evaluate financial statement data and apply critical thinking and ethical reasoning to
choose a course of action in various business contexts, and
5. identify how principles of accounting illustrate or illuminate principles of the gospel and their
application to our personal journeys of faith in Jesus Christ.
TOPICS TO BE COVERED
In ACC 200 and ACC 310 the statement of cash flows, inventory, revenue recognition, and other
topics were discussed. In ACC 403, these topics are reviewed and expanded upon, and new topics are
presented. Here are some of the topics we will cover this semester.
• The conceptual framework
• The FASB codification
• Primary financial statements
• Financial statement articulation
• Revenue recognition
ACC 403 Syllabus
Page 1 of 8
Accounting Junior Core
Financial– Accounting 403
Fall 2025 Syllabus
• Inventory valuation, analyses and reporting
• Time value of money
• Acquisition, disposal, and impairment of long-term assets
• Investments in marketable securities
• Long-term debt
LEARNING OUTCOMES
1. Apply the Marriott Values to class and team interactions to improve learning and the Junior Core
experience for yourself and others (Christlike leadership and excellence).
2. Apply financial accounting standards and concepts (listed above) to various business situations
(excellence).
3. Be able to use the FASB Accounting Standards Codification to understand and apply U.S. GAAP
(excellence).
4. Apply ethical considerations to financial reporting issues including understanding of the relevant
regulations related to sustainability disclosures (integrity in action).
5. Work effectively within a team (Christlike leadership and respect for all).
6. Demonstrate effective communication skills (via class discussion) and the ability to discuss subject
matter even in ad hoc discussions for which a formal presentation has not been prepared (i.e., be
able to answer questions posed in class) (excellence).
7. Meet regularly scheduled deadlines (excellence).
8. Demonstrate the value of regular reflection to deepen our understanding of financial accounting
concepts and to draw connections between our observed world and the principles of the gospel of
Jesus Christ to develop faith and testimony in His work (Christlike leadership).
REQUIRED ITEMS
1. Intermediate Accounting by Spiceland, Nelson, Thomas and Winchel, 2025 Release. This year
we will be using a digital version of the textbook. You will access the digital textbook through
a link provided in Canvas. We have negotiated a discounted price for this electronic
textbook that will be billed directly to your student account after the add/drop deadline.
2. Three course packets that contain the pre-class study questions, in-class handouts, and exam
review preparation materials for each midterm. We will provide the first of the three course
packets to you during the Junior Core orientation on the first day of fall semester classes. The
course packets will be directly billed to your student account after the add/drop deadline.
3. Financial calculator to be used in class and for exams. The HP10bII Plus is preferred and will
be demonstrated in class but you may also use a TI Ba II Plus or other financial calculator if
you are already comfortable using it. You may not use programmable calculators, graphing
calculators, smart phones, or phone apps for our exams in the testing center. We strongly
recommend that you begin the semester with a financial calculator so you can learn and
practice how to use it properly before the exams.
ACC 403 Syllabus
Page 2 of 8
Accounting Junior Core
Financial– Accounting 403
Fall 2025 Syllabus
CHARACTERISTICS OF SUCCESSFUL STUDENTS IN THIS COURSE:
• Choose to be optimistic and grateful for the opportunity to learn.
• Create your own definition of success this year. We encourage you to set your success goals
based on your input (something you can influence), not the outcome (something that is more
difficult to control).
• Focus on learning and helping others to learn. Remember that people learn at different speeds
and that is OK.
• Develop a learning approach that works for you (e.g., read/skim the material before class and
attempt the homework problems, ask questions in class and review following class).
• Think critically about principles of accounting.
• Ask questions in a timely manner when you do not understand.
• Practice application of your understanding by doing problems before checking the answers.
• Meet with your professor early and often in the semester if you are struggling.
• Have fun (this is hard, AND you are capable)!
• Until you know how you will experience the Junior Core, we suggest not working or working
as few hours as possible. This will prevent you from getting behind and overwhelmed.
Remember that the strong recommendation—if you choose to work—is no more than 10 hours
per week.
GRADING
We love all of you, however that love will not influence our application of the grading criteria! Everyone
is evaluated consistently based on performance in the following areas.
Performance Areas Points
Learning Reflections 45
Pre-Class Knowledge Demonstrations/Practice Exam 200
Review Quizzes 100
Waren Financial Statements 55
Midterm Exam I 175
Midterm Exam II 200
Final Exam 225
Total 1,000
Additional details for each area are provided in the following sections.
LEARNING REFLECTIONS
At the end each of class you will be asked to reflect on a question provided by your faculty and to record
your thoughts and reflections in your course packet. Three times during the semester, a Canvas quiz will
assess your participation in this learning reflection process. These graded quizzes will ask about your
participation in completing the reflections and the insights you have gained. Grading will be based on
your thoughtful completion of these reflections and quizzes, as well as your commitment to personal
growth in the BYU Marriott Values as evidenced by experiences you document.
ACC 403 Syllabus
Page 3 of 8
Accounting Junior Core
Financial– Accounting 403
Fall 2025 Syllabus
GRADED PRE-CLASS KNOWLEDGE DEMONSTRATIONS/PRACTICE EXAM
Graded pre-class quizzes are due prior to class. The purpose of these assessments is to aid you in
preparing for class. More specifically, these assessments aim to ensure important information is
understood and to challenge you enough to help you formulate questions for class. The pre-class
knowledge demonstrations are typically individual work. Most are open book, open notes, but strictly
individual efforts (INDIVIDUAL RED). Thus, you may NOT use AI (ex. ChatGPT) or receive note
material or suggestions from any other person, particularly someone who has already taken the
knowledge demonstration. Please follow the Quiz Policy instructions found in the Junior Core Policies
document. Note that prior to taking the pre-class graded knowledge demonstration associated with most
class periods, you will have the opportunity to complete several ungraded practice quizzes. The practice
quizzes will help you to learn the material prior to taking the graded pre-class knowledge demonstration.
We encourage you to work with your group members on this ungraded material so you can be better
prepared for the graded assessments.
One practice exam will be administered in the testing center prior to the first midterm. Students will
receive full credit for completing the practice exam on time as well as an online learning module in
Canvas on test taking skills. Combined these two activities will have the equivalent points of two pre-
class knowledge demonstrations. The practice exam and online learning module cannot be dropped.
Dropped Pre-Class Knowledge Demonstration Policy: Per the Junior Core Policies, we will allow
students to drop two pre-class quizzes to cover unexpected absences, illness, computer issues, or personal
conflicts. The intent is for these drops to take care of unforeseen and unplanned events such as short-
term illness, possible exposure to COVID while awaiting test results, personal or family emergencies,
or rare technical difficulties. The purpose of these dropped quizzes is not to raise your grade by dropping
low scores; it is to account for personal problems, which are very legitimate issues. You will also be
allowed to drop one additional pre-class knowledge demonstration by participating in a research project
and designating the 403 course. These research projects are conducted in the MSM behavioral lab located
on the third floor of the TNRB (https://marriott.byu.edu/bl/students/).
POST-CLASS “REVIEW” QUIZZES
Post-class quizzes (“Review Quizzes”) aim to facilitate your review and learning of prior class material.
Education research suggests that long-term learning is maximized when students review material right
before they are about to forget the concepts. Thus, the post-class quizzes will generally be available a
few days following the day the material is covered in class. These quizzes will also help you to study for
the exam incrementally rather than cramming at the end, which is likely to improve both learning and
test scores. After your first attempt, these quizzes are open book, open notes, and you can discuss the
quiz with your classmates, but you must submit your own answers (INDIVIDUAL YELLOW). Refer
to additional specific instructions included in these Review Quizzes on Canvas.
We generally allow four attempts (with no loss of points) to encourage you to work on these problems
until you master the concepts. Because we allow multiple attempts over several days, only one of
these quizzes will be automatically dropped and no additional drops are available. Please mark
your calendar with the due date so that you do not miss these great learning opportunities!
ACC 403 Syllabus
Page 4 of 8
Accounting Junior Core
Financial– Accounting 403
Fall 2025 Syllabus
WAREN FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
As a helpful step in preparing for your first mid-term exam, we will be compiling the financial
statements for the Waren case (Systems Understanding Aid). This case is also used in the Accounting
Information Systems course.
EXAMS
The financial examinations will be given on the dates indicated on the overall Junior Core calendar. The
examinations will cover material from the reading, classroom discussions, quizzes, and all other
assignments. Additional information will be provided prior to each exam.
Although the exams are important, we recognize that they are only one measure at one point in time.
Consequently, they cannot reflect your total ability or your potential. Although they are an imperfect
measure, they do provide an indication of your learning. Prepare seriously and do your best but remember
that grades are meant to measure your academic performance relative to this course; they do not assess
your overall potential as a person, nor do they assess your overall intelligence or worth.
PROFESSIONAL BEHAVIOR IN THE CLASSROOM
You are professionals and wonderful humans! Professional behavior by everyone helps to create an ideal
learning environment. Professionalism will be evident in your class preparation and demeanor, class
interactions and participation, communication with peers and faculty, contributions to a positive class
culture, ability to demonstrate emotional intelligence in all interactions, and ability to engage effectively
with your group. Unprofessional behavior will result in a conversation with your faculty to understand
how we can help you to improve. Ongoing unprofessional behavior will detrimentally impact your grade.
CLASS ORGANIZATION
• Pre-Class Preparation: For each Acc 403 class, we have prepared a Canvas Module associated
with the class (e.g., Class 1, Class 2, etc.) listing the pre-class assignments that should be
completed prior to taking the graded Knowledge Demonstration and attending class.
• Ungraded Pre-Class Quizzes and Optional Problems:
Not Graded, but very Important: Ungraded pre-class quizzes and optional problems will be
suggested for almost every class meeting. We encourage you to use the textbook, notes, etc. and
consult with your group while completing these ungraded quizzes and optional problems. Optional
problems are not graded but they give you additional opportunities to practice and learn the material.
Optional problems come from end-of-chapter textbook problems and can be accessed via a link in
Canvas or by reference to the print copy of your textbook. Solutions to selected end of chapter
problems are posted to Canvas.
ACC 403 Syllabus
Page 5 of 8
Accounting Junior Core
Financial– Accounting 403
Fall 2025 Syllabus
USE OF AI (EX. CHATGPT)
We encourage the responsible exploration of all new technologies, including AI (ex. ChatGPT), to help
you further your understanding of the profession and the topics we cover. We would, however, caution
you that this tool is not yet a very good professional accountant! Further, we want to be clear that use of
AI in completing assessments of knowledge such as pre-class knowledge demonstrations, review
quizzes, exams, reflections or other assignments in this course constitutes academic dishonesty.
HONOR CODE
In keeping with the principles of the BYU Honor Code, students are expected to be honest in their
academic work. Academic honesty means, most fundamentally, that any work you present as your own
must in fact be your own work and not that of another student or AI. Violations of this principle may
result in a failing grade in the course and additional disciplinary action by the university. Students are
also expected to adhere to the Dress and Grooming Standards. Adherence demonstrates respect for
yourself and others and ensures an effective learning and working environment. It is the university's
expectation, and every instructor's expectation in class, that each student will abide by all Honor Code
standards. Please call the Honor Code Office at 422-2847 if you have questions about those standards.
PREVENTING & RESPONDING TO SEXUAL MISCONDUCT
The health and well-being of students is of paramount importance at Brigham Young University. If you
or someone you know has experienced sexual harassment (including sexual violence), there are many
resources available for assistance.
In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, BYU prohibits unlawful sex
discrimination, including sexual harassment, against any participant in its education programs or
activities. The university also prohibits sexual harassment by its personnel and students. Sexual
harassment occurs when
• a person is subjected to unwelcome sexual speech or conduct so severe, pervasive, and offensive
that it effectively denies their ability to access any BYU education program or activity;
• any aid, benefit, or service of BYU is conditioned on a person’s participation in unwelcome
sexual conduct; or
• a person suffers sexual assault, dating violence, domestic violence, or stalking on the basis of
sex.
University policy requires all faculty members to promptly report incidents of sexual harassment that
come to their attention in any way, including through face-to-face conversations, a written class
assignment or paper, class discussion, email, text, or social media post. Incidents of sexual harassment
should be reported to the Title IX Coordinator at t9coordinator@byu.edu or (801) 422-8692 or 1085
WSC. Reports may also be submitted online at https://titleix.byu.edu/report or 1-888-238-1062 (24-
hours a day).
BYU offers confidential resources for those affected by sexual harassment, including the university’s
Sexual Assault Survivor Advocate, as well as a number of non-confidential resources and services that
may be helpful. Additional information about Title IX, the university’s Sexual Harassment Policy,
ACC 403 Syllabus
Page 6 of 8
Accounting Junior Core
Financial– Accounting 403
Fall 2025 Syllabus
reporting requirements, and resources can be found at http://titleix.byu.edu or by contacting the
university’s Title IX Coordinator.
STUDENT DISABILITY
Brigham Young University is committed to providing a working and learning atmosphere that
reasonably accommodates qualified persons with disabilities. A disability is a physical or mental
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities. Whether an impairment is
substantially limiting depends on its nature and severity, its duration or expected duration, and its
permanent or expected permanent or long-term impact. Examples include vision or hearing impairments,
physical disabilities, chronic illnesses, emotional disorders (e.g., depression, anxiety), learning disorders,
and attention disorders (e.g., ADHD). If you have a disability which impairs your ability to complete
this course successfully, please contact the University Accessibility Center (UAC), 2170 WSC or 801-
422-2767 to request a reasonable accommodation. The UAC can also assess students for learning,
attention, and emotional concerns. If you feel you have been unlawfully discriminated against on the
basis of disability, please contact the Equal Opportunity Office at 801-422-5895, eo_manager@byu.edu,
or visit https://hrs.byu.edu/equal-opportunity for help.”
RESPECTFUL ENVIRONMENT
"Sadly, from time to time, we do hear reports of those who are at best insensitive and at worst insulting
in their comments to and about others. We hear derogatory and sometimes even defamatory comments
about those with different political, athletic, or ethnic views or experiences. Such behavior is completely
out of place at BYU, and I enlist the aid of all to monitor carefully and, if necessary, correct any such
that might occur here, however inadvertent or unintentional. I worry particularly about demeaning
comments made about the career or major choices of women or men either directly or about members
of the BYU community generally. We must remember that personal agency is a fundamental principle
and that none of us has the right or option to criticize the lawful choices of another." President Cecil O.
Samuelson, Annual University Conference, August 24, 2010 "Occasionally, we ... hear reports that our
female faculty feel disrespected, especially by students, for choosing to work at BYU, even though each
one has been approved by the BYU Board of Trustees. Brothers and sisters, these things ought not to be.
Not here. Not at a university that shares a constitution with the School of the Prophets." Vice President
John S. Tanner, Annual University Conference, August 24, 2010.
MENTAL HEALTH AND WELLNESS
Mental health concerns and stressful life events can affect students’ academic performance and quality
of life. BYU Counseling and Psychological Services (CAPS, 1500 WSC, 801-422-3035, caps.byu.edu)
provides individual, couples, and group counseling, as well as stress management services. These
services are confidential and are provided by the university at no cost for full-time students. For general
information please visit https://caps.byu.edu; for more immediate concerns please
visit http://help.byu.edu. In the Marriott School, we also have a Wellness and Prevention Specialist
(Tanner 438, 801-422-5139). We have also included a student wellness resources section on the home
page of our Canvas course.
ACC 403 Syllabus
Page 7 of 8
Accounting Junior Core
Financial– Accounting 403
Fall 2025 Syllabus
ACADEMIC HONESTY
The first injunction of the Honor Code is the call to "be honest." Students come to the university not only
to improve their minds, gain knowledge, and develop skills that will assist them in their life's work, but
also to build character. "President David O. McKay taught that character is the highest aim of education"
(The Aims of a BYU Education, p.6). It is the purpose of the BYU Academic Honesty Policy to assist
in fulfilling that aim. BYU students should seek to be totally honest in their dealings with others. They
should complete their own work and be evaluated based upon that work. They should avoid academic
dishonesty and misconduct in all its forms, including but not limited to plagiarism, fabrication or
falsification, cheating, and other academic misconduct.
FINANCIAL NEED
The university has many programs that provide financial assistance to those in need. If you need help
connecting to those resources, please contact Professor Brant Christensen (bchristensen@byu.edu or
801-422-2455).
ACC 403 Syllabus
Page 8 of 8