ACC 404: Financial Accounting 2
Fall 2025 Syllabus
Welcome to ACC 404! We are glad that you are part of the SOA and BYU Marriott family. The vision of BYU
Marriot is to “transform the world through Christlike leadership.” We aim to “develop leaders of faith, intellect,
and character.” To do so, we focus on four core values, which we hope you will strive to undertake as you
participate in this course:
1. Faith in Jesus Christ
We value deep and abiding faith in Jesus Christ. Our faith gives us the capacity to envision a better future,
the confidence to make that future happen, and the courage to act in the face of challenges.
2. Integrity in Action
We value integrity and hold ourselves to the highest moral and ethical standards. Acting with integrity builds
trust, strengthens character, and focuses our ambitions on things of eternal consequence.
3. Respect for All
We value respect for all individuals as children of God and recognize the inherent worth, divine potential,
and agency of each person. A climate of respect and belonging enhances our learning, facilitates
collaboration, and encourages personal growth.
4. Excellence
We value excellence in learning, teaching, research, management, and leadership. An expectation of
excellence magnifies our influence and motivates us to continually improve.
COURSE PURPOSE
In addition to offering experiences that can facilitate character development and give you the opportunity to
put the BYU Marriott Values into practice, after taking this course, you will be able to:
1. Analyze complex economic events to identify and extract relevant information necessary to record
technical accounting transactions with transparency and accuracy in accordance with U.S. Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles,
2. Recognize estimates, judgements, and assumptions on financial statements, and
3. Critically evaluate financial reporting decisions, including recognizing the impact of accounting
policies on financial statements.
TOPICS TO BE COVERED
ACC 404 is the second intermediate financial accounting class. We will build on some topics you learned in
your three previous financial accounting courses and delve into more complicated accounting topics such as:
• Equity and stock-based compensation
• Earnings per share calculations and reporting
• Leases (lessee and lessor)
• Error corrections
• Derivatives
• Accounting for income taxes
• Consolidations
• Foreign currency translation
• Statement of cash flows
• Sustainability
LEARNING OUTCOMES
1. Apply the BYU Marriott Values to class and classmate interactions to improve learning and the
classroom experience for yourself and others (Christlike leadership and professional development).
2. Apply financial accounting standards and concepts (listed above) to various business situations
(excellence in technical accounting knowledge).
3. Be able to use the FASB Accounting Standards Codification to understand and apply U.S. GAAP
(excellence in technical accounting knowledge).
4. Apply ethical considerations to financial reporting issues (integrity in action).
5. Demonstrate effective communication skills (via class discussion) and the ability to discuss subject
matter even in ad hoc discussions for which a formal presentation has not been prepared (i.e., be able
to answer questions posed in class) (professional development).
REQUIRED ITEMS
1. Intermediate Accounting, 18th edition, Kieso,Weygandt & Warfield, Wiley, 2022
a. The digital platform will give you access to the reading and other resources
b. Please also purchase the loose-leaf print version of the textbook as the digital version is not
always available and deadlines will not be adjusted for technical issues. The printed loose leaf
is available for purchase at the bookstore.
2. Financial calculator [such as the HP10bII Plus (recommended)] to be used in class and for exams.
Programmable and graphing calculators like the TI-85 are NOT allowed. You also may not use smart
phones, smart watches, AI, or apps on exams.
CHARACTERISTICS OF SUCCESSFUL STUDENTS IN THIS COURSE:
How to succeed here:
• Bring optimism and grit. Hard things are doable with steady effort.
• Define success by inputs. Set goals for preparation and practice; outcomes follow.
• Prepare before class. Skim/read, attempt problems, arrive with questions.
• Practice first, then check. Do problems before looking at solutions.
• Ask early. Use TAs and faculty office hours before you’re stuck.
• Support each other. People learn at different speeds - help and learn together.
• Have fun. This is challenging and you’re capable.
GRADING
We love all of you AND that love will not influence our application of the grading criteria. Everyone is
evaluated consistently based on performance in the areas below. This semester you have some flexibility in
how you earn your points.
Grading Path Options: Sections 1 & 2
Sections 1 and 2 offer two grading paths. Choose the one that fits your learning style for each section. Once
chosen, you are responsible for the requirements of that path for that section:
• Option A: Default option. Pre-class knowledge demonstrations, post-class reviews, learning reflections,
and exams will be graded.
• Option B: Opt-in option. Exams and learning reflections are graded. No knowledge demonstrations or
post-class reviews will be graded (though you are still encouraged to complete them for your own
learning).
o If you select Option B and score below 75% on the multiple-choice portion of an exam, you
will have the opportunity to complete exam rework to raise your multiple choice score up to
75%. Rework must be completed individually. This is intended to help you master key
foundational concepts and provide a chance to demonstrate your understanding - similar to how
other students have the opportunity through pre-class knowledge demonstrations and post-class
reviews.
Further information on the Options for Section 1 & 2 will be explained in class.
You’ll make your choice at the beginning of each section, and you can switch paths between Section 1 and
2. The path you choose affects how your grade is calculated for that section only.
Grading Options Table Sections 1 and 2
Graded Items Points (Option A) Points (Option B)
Pre-Class Knowledge 50 --
Demonstrations
Post-Class Reviews 50 --
Learning Reflections 25 25
Exam 225 (100 pts MC; 125 pts workout) 325 (200 pts MC; 125 pts workout)
Subtotal (Sections 1 and 2) 350 350
Section 3
In Section 3, all students will complete pre-class knowledge demonstrations, mini assessments, learning
reflections, and a cumulative project. There is no final exam in this course – instead you will complete a final
project to demonstrate your knowledge.
Grading Table Section 3
Graded Items Points
Pre-Class Knowledge 50
Demonstrations
Concept Mini Assessments 125
Learning Reflections 25
Cumulative Project 100
Subtotal (Section 3) 300
Grading Table Summary
Section Subtotals Points
Section 1 350
Section 2 350
Section 3 300
Total for Course 1000
LEARNING REFLECTIONS
Generally, at the end of class, you will be asked to reflect on a question provided by your faculty and to
record your thoughts and reflections. Four times during the semester, a Canvas quiz will assess your
participation in the learning reflection process. These graded quizzes will ask about your participation in
completing the reflections and the insights you have (hopefully) gained. Grading will be based on your
thoughtful completion of these reflections and quizzes, as well as your commitment to personal growth in the
BYU Marriott Values as evidenced by experiences you document.
GRADED PRE-CLASS KNOWLEDGE DEMONSTRATIONS
Graded pre-class knowledge demonstrations are due 30 minutes prior to class. The purpose of these
assignments is to aid you in preparing for class. More specifically, these assignments aim to ensure important
information is understood and to challenge you enough to help you formulate questions for class. In Sections
1 and 2 of the course, pre-class knowledge demonstrations are graded in Option A and ungraded in Option B
(still strongly recommended). In Section 3, pre-class knowledge demonstrations are required and graded for
all students, regardless of the option selected earlier in the course.
If you choose grading Option A, the pre-class knowledge demonstrations are open book, open notes, but
strictly individual efforts. Thus, you may NOT receive note material or suggestions from any person who has
already taken the quiz, and it is NOT appropriate to use AI to answer these questions. Note that prior to
taking the pre-class knowledge demonstrations associated with most class periods, you will have the
opportunity to complete several ungraded practice exercises. The practice exercises will help you to learn the
material prior to taking the graded pre-class knowledge demonstrations.
Dropped Pre-Class Quiz Policy: In Sections 1 and 2, if you choose Option A, we will only count your five
highest pre-class quiz scores per section. In Section 3, all students will complete pre-class quizzes, and the
same policy applies: only your five highest scores will count. This approach provides flexibility for
unexpected absences, illness, or other personal conflicts. The purpose of this policy is not to boost grades by
dropping low scores, but to provide space for real-life challenges while keeping the focus on meaningful
learning.
POST-CLASS REVIEWS
Post-class reviews aim to facilitate your review and learning of prior class material. Education research
suggests that long-term learning is maximized when students review material right before they are about to
forget the concepts. Thus, the post-class quizzes will generally be available a few days following the day the
material is covered in class. Post-class quizzes are only present in Sections 1 and 2, and are only graded if
you select Option A. If you choose Option B, you may still complete them for your own learning, but they
will not count toward your grade.
These quizzes will also help you to study for the exam incrementally rather than cramming at the end, which
is likely to improve both learning and test scores. These quizzes are open book, open notes, and you can
discuss the quiz with your classmates, but you must submit your own answers and use of AI is NOT
appropriate.
Also, we allow four attempts (with no loss of points) to encourage you to work on these problems until you
master the concepts. These quizzes are not eligible to be dropped as they allow four attempts over 2
days. Please mark your calendar with the due date so that you do not miss these great learning
opportunities!
EXAMS
There will be two exams, one at the end of Section 1 and one at the end of Section 2, on the dates listed in the
course calendar. Each exam will assess material from the readings, classroom discussions, quizzes, and other
assignments. Additional details will be shared before each exam.
Rework Opportunity:
If you choose Option B and score below 75% on the multiple-choice portion of an exam, you will be given
the option to complete exam rework to raise your multiple choice score up to 75%. Rework must be
completed individually and by the announced deadline. This is designed to help you master key foundational
concepts and keep you on track. Rework is not available if you choose Option A.
Although exams are important, they are just one measure of your understanding at a given point in time. They
do not reflect your full potential, intelligence, or worth. Prepare seriously and do your best – but know that
learning and growth are the real goals here.
MINI ASSESSMENTS
In Section 3, post-class quizzes are replaced with mini assessments - short, targeted assignments designed to
deepen your understanding of key concepts and ensure you can apply them in meaningful ways. These
assessments build on class discussions and pre-class preparation, helping you bridge the gap between theory
and real-world application. Mini assessments may include short problems, brief written responses, or applied
analysis tasks. They are designed to reinforce learning, provide timely feedback, and prepare you for the final
project.
CUMULATIVE PROJECT
Instead of a final exam, you’ll complete an individual final project that builds on what we've done in class –
pushing your understanding one step further. You'll apply course concepts in a new context and communicate
your analysis in a thoughtful, professional way, similar to what will be expected in your career. This project is
a chance to demonstrate excellence in technical accounting while practicing professional communication –
skills you’ll use in your career.
Instructions and grading criteria will be shared during Section 3, and the project is due during finals week. It
will serve as a meaningful capstone to your Accounting 404 experience.
* You are emerging professionals, and we’ll treat you as such. Professional conduct looks like: consistent
preparation, respectful participation, thoughtful communication, emotional intelligence, and contributions to a
positive class culture. If concerns arise, we’ll meet to plan improvement. Ongoing unprofessional behavior
will affect your grade.
CLASS ORGANIZATION
Pre-Class Preparation: For each Acc 404 class, a Canvas Page associated with the class (e.g., Class 1, Class
2, etc.), will list the pre-class assignments that should be completed prior to attending class.
Ungraded Pre-Class Exercises and Homework:
Not Graded, but very Important: Ungraded pre-class exercises and homework problems will be suggested
for almost every class meeting. We encourage you to use textbooks, notes, the Codification and study-
buddies etc, while completing these ungraded exercises and homework assignments. Pre-class homework
assignments are not graded but they may help you to learn the material if you put in the work. Use of Google
or AI to answer these questions is generally not a good way to internalize the material so we do not encourage
their use for this purpose.
In class Assessment:
Finally, we may have in class assessments. These are typically unannounced and can be offered in any class
period. Thus, it is always a good idea to come to class and to be prepared for class. Makeup assessments will
not be offered for students absent from class unless the absence is due to a university-excused event and we
are notified in advance. Any in class assessment will be grouped with your pre-class knowledge
demonstrations for grading purposes.
CLASSROOM ABSENCES
If you are unable to attend class for any reason (e.g., illness, interviews, personal matters), you are expected
to notify your faculty in advance with a brief explanation. If you are feeling unwell or may be contagious,
please prioritize your health and the well-being of others by staying home.
Please note that class sessions will not be recorded, and faculty will not provide individualized notes for
missed classes. However, in-class materials will be posted after each session for your reference. If you need
additional clarification or support after a missed class, we encourage you to reach out to your classmates, the
TA, or your faculty.
HONOR CODE
In keeping with the principles of the BYU Honor Code, students are expected to be honest in all of their
academic work. Academic honesty means, most fundamentally, that any work you present as your own must
in fact be your own work and not that of another or of AI. Violations of this principle may result in a failing
grade in the course and additional disciplinary action by the university. Students are also expected to adhere
to the Dress and Grooming Standards. Adherence demonstrates respect for yourself and others and ensures an
effective learning and working environment. It is the university's expectation, and every instructor's
expectation in class, that each student will abide by all Honor Code standards. Please call the Honor Code
Office at 422-2847 if you have questions about those standards.
MENTAL HEALTH
Mental health concerns and stressful life events can affect students’ academic performance and quality of life.
BYU Counseling and Psychological Services (CAPS, 1500 WSC, 801-422-3035, caps.byu.edu) provides
individual, couples, and group counseling, as well as stress management services. These services are
confidential and are provided by the university at no cost for full-time students. For general information
please visit https://caps.byu.edu; for more immediate concerns please visit http://help.byu.edu. In the Marriott
School, we also have a wonderful Wellness and Prevention Specialist, Aliah Hall (Tanner 438, 801-422-
5139).
STUDENT DISABILITY
Brigham Young University is committed to providing a working and learning atmosphere, which reasonably
accommodates qualified persons with disabilities. If you have any disability which may impair your ability to
complete this course successfully, please contact the University Accessibility Center at (801) 422-2767.
Reasonable academic accommodations are reviewed for all students who have qualified, documented
disabilities. Services are coordinated with the student and instructor by the University Accessibility Center. If
you need assistance or if you feel you have been unlawfully discriminated against on the basis of disability,
you may seek resolution through established grievance policy and procedures. Please contact the Equal
Employment Office at (801) 422-5895.
FINANCIAL NEED
The university has many programs that provide financial assistance to those in need. If you need help
connecting to those resources, please contact Professor Brant Christensen (bchristensen@byu.edu or 801-
422-2455).
RESPECTFUL ENVIRONMENT
"Sadly, from time to time, we do hear reports of those who are at best insensitive and at worst insulting in
their comments to and about others... We hear derogatory and sometimes even defamatory comments about
those with different political, athletic, or ethnic views or experiences. Such behavior is completely out of
place at BYU, and I enlist the aid of all to monitor carefully and, if necessary, correct any such that might
occur here, however inadvertent or unintentional. "I worry particularly about demeaning comments made
about the career or major choices of women or men either directly or about members of the BYU community
generally. We must remember that personal agency is a fundamental principle and that none of us has the
right or option to criticize the lawful choices of another." President Cecil O. Samuelson, Annual University
Conference, August 24, 2010 "Occasionally, we ... hear reports that our female faculty feel disrespected,
especially by students, for choosing to work at BYU, even though each one has been approved by the BYU
Board of Trustees. Brothers and sisters, these things ought not to be. Not here. Not at a university that shares
a constitution with the School of the Prophets." Vice President John S. Tanner, Annual University
Conference, August 24, 2010.
PREVENTING & RESPONDING TO SEXUAL MISCONDUCT
The health and well-being of students is of paramount importance at Brigham Young University. If you or
someone you know has experienced sexual harassment (including sexual violence), there are many resources
available for assistance.
Brigham Young University prohibits all forms of sexual harassment—including sexual assault, dating
violence, domestic violence, and stalking—by its personnel and students and in all its education programs or
activities. University policy requires all faculty members to promptly report incidents of sexual harassment
that come to their attention in any way and encourages reports by students who experience or become aware
of sexual harassment. Incidents should be reported to the Title IX Coordinator at t9coordinator@byu.edu or
(801) 422-8692 or 1085 WSC. Reports may also be submitted online at https://titleix.byu.edu/report or 1-888-
238-1062 (24-hours a day). BYU offers a number of resources and services for those affected by sexual
harassment, including the university’s confidential Sexual Assault Survivor Advocate. Additional information
about sexual harassment, the university’s Sexual Harassment Policy, reporting requirements, and resources
can be found in the University Catalog, by visiting http://titleix.byu.edu, or by contacting the university’s
Title IX Coordinator.
ACADEMIC HONESTY
The first injunction of the Honor Code is the call to "be honest." Students come to the university not only to
improve their minds, gain knowledge, and develop skills that will assist them in their life's work, but also to
build character. "President David O. McKay taught that character is the highest aim of education" (The Aims
of a BYU Education, p.6). It is the purpose of the BYU Academic Honesty Policy to assist in fulfilling that
aim. BYU students should seek to be totally honest in their dealings with others. They should complete their
own work and be evaluated based upon that work. They should avoid academic dishonesty and misconduct in
all its forms, including but not limited to plagiarism, fabrication or falsification, cheating, and other academic
misconduct. All students, once admitted to BYU, are required to observe the standards of the Honor Code
whether on or off campus.
USE OF CHATGPT OR OTHER AI
In this class, we acknowledge the growing influence of Generative AI (GenAI) in academic and business
settings. Students are expected to follow university policies related to GenAI (see https://genai.byu.edu/) and
adhere to our classes specific guidelines. Unless stated otherwise, you may use GenAI to support your
learning and enhance your deliverables but not as a shortcut to avoid learning. We want to be clear that use of
this tool for aid in completing assessments of knowledge such as knowledge demonstrations, review quizzes,
exams, reflections, projects or other assessments in this course constitutes academic dishonesty. This includes
any use, such as brainstorming or editing. This policy aims to help you become the best professional possible.