MathEd 301, Fall 2025
Instructor: Dr. Steven Jones
Email: sjones@mathed.byu.edu (email is better than Learning Suite messaging!)
Office: A-180T, ESC / Office Hours: Mon 3:00-4:00, Thur 3:00-5:00
Required Text: Putting Essential Understanding Into Practice: Statistics 9-12, by NCTM.
Course Website: learningsuite.byu.edu. Log in using MyBYU info and look for MathEd 301.
Course Goals: This class is meant to be a very practical class focused on (a) developing your
own understanding of statistics, and (b) teaching stats/prob to middle and high school students.
AI and Other Technology: These tools can be helpful, *if * you use them well. You are
expected to understand the material and construct conceptual explanations completely on your
own. Here are some guidelines to help you use these tools properly:
1. Reading or watching an explanation or solution that someone else, or AI, has generated is
much easier than being able to construct it yourself. Please be careful of that trap!
2. Even if you use AI (etc.) in your study, you cannot include AI-generated explanations in
anything you submit for this class (nor anything generated by any other tools or people).
Grades: Your final grades will be calculated using the following breakdown. Each category is
described in detail in the following sections of the syllabus.
10% In-Class Participation 45% Four Unit Check-in Tests
30% Homework assignments ▪ Unit 1 = 9%, Units 2,3,4 = 12% each
Required MEA activities 15% Comprehensive Project
Your overall class scores will be kept in Learning Suite.
There is NO extra credit in this class. It’s good to know this now, right? So, how do you get a
good grade? Come to class and participate in class discussions. Do the assignments. Prepare for
the short-tests. Yes, it will take work, but it is a fairly straightforward process.
In-Class Participation (10%): In this class you are colleagues, working together toward a
common goal of becoming great teachers. As such, this math education course is not a place to\njust passively listen to the teacher and try to mimic what I do. You must learn to work with each
other and with me as colleagues. To participate in this way means you must (1) attend all class
sessions, arriving on time and staying until the end of class, (2) participate in group work and
discussions, and (3) participate in whole-class discussions. Of course, I realize not everybody can
be talking all the time, but you should be making regular contributions. Each week, you will
receive a participation score for that week. To receive full credit, you will likely need to
participate beyond your personal comfort zone. Do not expect to get a “3” just for being in class.
Weekly participation scores (each week, a score out of 3 points will be given):
Contributions to discussion in both small groups and whole class = 3
Contributions to small groups, but only little contribution to the whole class = 2
Only minor contributions to small groups, or no contribution to the whole class = 1
Arrive late or leave early = –1 from what the score would have been (each time)
Absent on one day = –2 from what the score would have been
Absent on both days = 0
Illness or emergency: You get one free dropped weekly participation score, so if you are sick,
have an emergency, or other issue, your dropped score will cover that. Of course, if you have a
longer term issue or emergency, please email me so we can work something out.
Classroom Comportment: Everyone should be absolutely respectful to all others in the
classroom. Disagreements are fine if done respectfully and professionally. We’re in this together,
and it’s important to listen to and understand each others’ thinking, reasoning, and viewpoints.
Assignments (30%): Each class you will have a homework assignment due 10 minutes before
the start of the next class. Instructions for doing these assignments are in Learning Suite in the
“Content” tab. Since this is a teacher-training class, these assignments are focused on developing
you as a teacher, and your own conceptual understanding, rather than just getting answers to
problems. Homework will be submitted electronically through Learning Suite. You can either
type it and submit that OR handwrite it and take clean pictures/scans to submit.
**These assignments take time, thought, and effort if they are to be done well. Expect ~2-3 hours
per assignment, depending on the assignment. Don't plan on rushing to do them right before
they're due! You won’t have time if you try that.\nUnit “Check-in Tests” (45% total): Our class consists of 4 units, each lasting ~3 weeks. At the
end of a unit, you will have a “check-in test” in the testing center. Tests typically take ~1–1¼
hour to do. Please see the unit schedules in Learning Suites for exact dates and how to prepare.
Comprehensive Project (15%): One of the best ways to make sure you fully understand major
principles of statistics is to have you carry out and report on statistical studies of your own. In
this project you will design a study, collect data, run statistical tests, and discuss your results.
This project essentially serves as your “final exam.” Detailed instructions for this project are
posted in Learning Suite. A good time to start is about halfway through the semester.
MEA Activities: An important part of your teaching career is collaborating with other teachers.
In our Math Ed program you are expected to begin to do so by participating in our MEA
activities. As a requirement, you need to attend 2 MEA activities this semester. There are usually
around 4-5 to choose from; look for posted information from the MEA. For each uncompleted
activity, your final grade will be lowered by one steps (i.e., A to A–, A– to B+, etc.). If you do
not attend any activities, your final grade will be lowered two steps (i.e., A to B+, A– to B, etc.)
No Late/Make-up Work nor Tests: I do not accept anything turned in late. There is also NO
make-up work if you do not turn something in. I also do NOT allow make-up tests. If a
legitimate emergency comes up during one of the test times, you need to contact me
immediately, BEFORE it occurs so we can work something out. Do not wait until after the test is
over to contact me. If so, you might not be able to make it up.
Lowest Score Drops for Participation and Assignments: Your lowest single participation
score and your lowest single homework assignment score will be dropped from your overall
grade. These are already meant to account for illness, emergencies, etc. For example, if you
miss a week from being sick, that would count as your dropped participation score, and you can
use your homework drop to not turn in one of the assignments. Of course, if a long-term
emergency arises, I can definitely work with you. If that occurs, please email or talk to me
immediately to make an arrangement.\nBYU Honor Code
In keeping with the principles of the BYU Honor Code, students are expected to be honest in all of their
academic work. Academic honesty means, most fundamentally, that any work you present as your own
must in fact be your own work and not that of another. Violations of this principle may result in a failing
grade in the course and additional disciplinary action by the university. Students are also expected to
adhere to the Dress and Grooming Standards. Adherence demonstrates respect for yourself and others and
ensures an effective learning and working environment. It is the university's expectation, and my own
expectation in class, that each student will abide by all Honor Code standards. Please call the Honor Code
Office at 422-2847 if you have questions about those standards.
Preventing Sexual Discrimination and Harassment
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 prohibits sex discrimination against any participant in an
educational program or activity that receives federal funds. The act is intended to eliminate sex
discrimination in education. Title IX covers discrimination in programs, admissions, activities, and
student-to-student sexual harassment. BYU's policy against sexual harassment extends not only to
employees of the university, but to students as well. If you encounter unlawful sexual harassment or
gender-based discrimination, please talk to your professor; contact the Equal Employment Office at 422-
5895 or 367-5689 (24-hours); or contact the Honor Code Office at 422-2847.
Students with Disabilities
Brigham Young University is committed to providing a working and learning atmosphere that reasonably
accommodates qualified persons with disabilities. If you have any disability which may impair your
ability to complete this course successfully, please contact the Services for Students with Disabilities
Office (422-2767). Reasonable academic accommodations are reviewed for all students who have
qualified, documented disabilities. Services are coordinated with the student and instructor by the SSD
Office. If you need assistance or if you feel you have been unlawfully discriminated against on the basis
of disability, you may seek resolution through established grievance policy and procedures by contacting
the Equal Employment Office at 422-5895, D-285 ASB.