Math Ed 476R—Secondary Mathematics Student-Teaching
Fall 2025
Course Philosophy
Learning to teach mathematics is a process that requires more than simply learning how to survive in a
classroom. Learning to teach mathematics requires gaining experience in thinking about important
mathematical ideas and planning the learning activities that will best help students come to understand
those ideas. It is through reflection on these experiences that you will create a pedagogical foundation
on which you can base the life-long learning process known as teaching mathematics.
Course Objectives
This student teaching experience has been designed to help you gain experience and knowledge about
the following areas:
1. Students’ mathematical thinking and understanding
2. Designing and teaching mathematics lessons that engage students in exploring and coming to
understand important mathematical ideas
3. The overall expectations of a public-school teacher
Course Expectations
You will earn either Credit or No-Credit for this course. Whether you earn credit will be determined by
the university supervisor with considerable consultation with your cooperating teacher as well as
demonstrating competency in all areas of the BYU Professional Teacher Candidate Rubric (TCA), and
a passing score on the EDA (80% or higher). Although you will be asked to complete a number of
assignments for this course, the feedback on these assignments will be formative rather than
summative (i.e., comments rather than points). The quality and consistency of your work will be a
large factor in determining your overall level of professionalism and competence and will thus play a
large role in determining whether you pass the course as well as the recommendations from your
cooperating teacher and university supervisor.
Your attendance in your student teaching is also important. BYU policy states “At BYU, student
teaching is a capstone experience that places full-time BYU students as teachers in classrooms and
requires the same commitment and accountability to K-12 learners as fully-employed teachers.
Therefore, student teachers are required to keep contracted teacher days and hours from the beginning
to the end of the BYU semester. Absences must be approved in advance and may result in additional
time added to the experience. Students are also expected to do extracurricular activities as appropriate
for the content area and must meet all required stated competencies as measured by BYU
assessments.” If you are sick make sure you let your co-operating teacher as well as your university
supervisor know.
Writing to Learn
A writing component accompanies most of the learning-to-teach activities of student teaching. Some
wonder why there would be so much writing in a course about learning to teach mathematics, sharing
protestations such as, “This is about mathematics, not English” or “I chose to go into mathematics to
get away from writing”. Because you may have had thoughts along these lines, below are three
primary reasons why writing is so prominent in this experience:
1. Teachers are communicators, and mathematics teachers are communicators of mathematics.
You will develop the facility to communicate about mathematics, its learning and teaching as
you write about your learning-to-teach experiences. This ability to communicate will be an
invaluable asset as you teach and as you reflect on that teaching.\n2. We build knowledge by sharing it. The writing process will require you to seek not only for
connections among the various concepts you are learning, but also for ways to articulate those
connections. In turn, efforts to synthesize and organize your ideas will lead you to explore yet
deeper and broader connections. This recursive process is the essence of learning to teach.
3. Writing is a lens on understanding. Throughout your career as a teacher, those you work with
(students, parents, colleagues and administrators) will judge your competence, at least in part,
on the quality of your writing. They will take what you write as evidence of what you know
and how you know it. The same is true during your student teaching experience. You should
interpret all writing assignments as an opportunity to make a case for your own understanding.
Learning-to-Teach Activities
You will be involved in the following learning-to-teach activities during the student teaching
experience. A majority of the assignments associated with these activities will be done during the first
half of the field experience.
During the first five weeks of your student teaching experience, you will spend a considerable amount
of time planning lessons, observing others teach and reflecting on those lessons.
Daily Journal: Daily journals (weeks 1-2) are brief writing assignments wherein you write about the
social and socio-mathematical norms you see in the classroom, note mathematical and pedagogical
conversations you have with your cooperating teacher and reflect on interesting student mathematical
thinking that you observe. At the end of each week, you will submit the collection of journal entries on
Learning Suite. Your entries will be of most value if you can use them as a constant reminder to
keep your eyes and ears open for insights into students’ mathematical thinking and teachers’
effective mathematical pedagogical practice.
At the end of the first two weeks, you will no longer fill out the daily journal, but you are asked to look
for student’s mathematical thinking that you didn’t anticipate or that was a different way of
conceptualizing a math idea. Continue to discuss these with your peer student teacher as well as your
mentor teacher.
Getting to Know your students: There are many factors and resources that can influence and support
student learning. Some of these include but are not limited to; knowledge of individual students,
instructional resources that are available, and norms in the classroom as well as norms you create with
your students. During the first two weeks, work with your mentor teacher to make a list of resources
that are available in your classroom and your school, send an email home to the parents/guardians
letting them know who you are and that you will be student teaching in their child’s math class, and for
each class that you teach do some sort of getting to know you activity (if you do a survey make sure to
approve it with your mentor teacher). You will write a 2–3-page paper about the resources available
and about what you learned about your students. Summarize what resources are available, and one or
two things that you learned that is common to the students in each class and one thing about a specific
student in each class that you are teaching. Identify and describe two implications for teaching, one
based on the resources available and one about your knowledge of your students. As part of this paper,
include the email you sent home to parents and describe anything you learned from this email.
Observation Record: Observation records are detailed notes on some particular aspect (see below) of
a mathematics lesson. Although you will observe many classes throughout the week, you will choose
two lessons each week (during weeks 1, 2 and 4) for these observations records—one lesson taught by
your cooperating teacher and one taught by another teacher in your school or in your cluster school(s).\nThe two observations records for a given week, along with a brief (1-2 page) synthesis of the
observations and implications for your own teaching, are due on the Saturday of that week.
Week 1: Classroom discourse
Week 2: Student’s Classroom Experience
Week 4: Teachable Moments
Lesson Plans: Each week that you are observed by your university supervisor you need to send your
lesson plan to your university supervisor. The lesson plan needs to be submitted at least the night
before you teach your lesson. You may use any form you choose for your lesson plan, but the lesson
plan needs to include the following:
• FMC & Learning Goals
• Your Task
• Description of your launch, explore and discussion
• Anticipated student thinking with possible assessing and advancing questions
Teach/Observe/Reflect: During weeks 2-5, and again in week 14, you will spend a considerable
amount of time teaching or observing your peer student teachers teach and then participating in a
reflection meeting following the lessons. When it is your turn to be the host school, you and your peer
student teacher will be teaching two periods of the same course. You will plan your lesson together,
using the lesson plan template of your choice, then teach your classes individually. Seek feedback
from your cooperating teacher and university supervisor as you prepare these lessons. On the day
you teach bring sufficient copies of your lesson plan to distribute to the observers.
Those who observe the lesson should take notes on their copy of the lesson plan. As an observer, use
your copy of the lesson plan to take notes on how students respond to the lesson. You should focus on
more than what students say—focus also on what they do, how they react, and what they write. Try to
get a feel for how the students are experiencing the mathematics that day. In order to give the best
feedback possible to your peers, think of yourself as providing a “fresh set of eyes” on how students
participate in the lesson. Avoid focusing too much on the presentation of the lesson, except where it
ties directly to student thinking.
A reflection meeting will follow each of these teaching/observing activities. The reflection meeting
will begin with the peer student teacher sharing mathematics that they observed students doing, and the
teachers stating their goals and rationales for the lesson. They should be prepared to respond to
questions such as, “Why did you use those particular questions and tasks?” and “Did students respond
as you anticipated?” Peer observers will then be given the opportunity to ask clarifying questions about
the planned lesson and to share their observations of student thinking and how that thinking related to
the goals of the lesson. The reflection conversation should constantly be driven by reference to these
goals. After this discussion has concluded, the university supervisor and cooperating teacher will lead
discussions on general pedagogical principles that relate to the foregoing lessons and reflections.
Video Reflections: Weeks 3 & 4 you will video tape the lesson that you teach for your cluster group
reflection. You will upload the video on Learning Suite and watch for instances in your video that
demonstrate student thinking or questions you pose during your lesson.
Week 3: One of the peer student teachers will video tape their lesson. Both student teachers will watch
the video individually, look for how student thinking is used during the lesson, then together, look at
the instances of student thinking that you both identified. Write a 1-2 paragraph summary about what\nyou noticed and specific goals you have for the next lesson you will teach. Submit your write up on
Learning Suite by Saturday of week 3.
Week 4: The other student teacher will video tape their lesson. Both student teachers will watch the
video individually, look for different types of questions that were posed during the lesson and who
responded to the questions, then together, discuss the types of questions that you identified and how
the students responded to the questions. Write a 1-2 paragraph summary about what you noticed and
specific goals you have for the next lesson you will teach. Submit your write up on Learning Suite by
Saturday of week 4.
Student Interview: Two times during weeks 3 and 5, we would like you to sit down with a student
and interview them about their responses to a recent test, quiz or homework assignment. This will give
you an opportunity to get to know the student and to gain insight into areas where they appear to
understand the mathematics as well as areas where they lack understanding. Before the interview
observe this student in the classroom. Make note of what they do and say and try to imagine what that
student is experiencing during each part of the class. Try to “capture” the students mathematical
experience. Next interview the student and audio record the interview. Begin the interview by asking
the student to explain their reasoning on various problems. Your goal is to get them to talk about their
thinking, so avoid teaching them at this point. As you listen to the student explain their reasoning, feel
free to pose questions or related tasks that you believe will give you further insights into their
understanding. After you have conducted the interview, you are welcome to provide the student with
any help you deem necessary based on your interview.
Your assignment for this activity is to write a 2-3 page paper wherein you characterize the student’s
mathematical experience in the classroom and their mathematical understanding and lack of
understanding. Following this characterization, discuss what you believe this student needs
(mathematical tasks, experiences, etc.) in order to increase their understanding. In other words, where
should their learning go from here? Submit each of these papers by Saturday of weeks 3 and 5 on
Learning Suite.
Weekly Assignments (due on Saturday by 11:59 pm each week)
Week 1 1) Daily Journal 2) paper on “Classroom Discourse” observations 3) Send email to parents
1) Daily Journal 2) paper on “Student’s Classroom Experience” observations 3) “Getting to know
Week 2
your students” paper.
1) Student interview paper 2) Cluster student teachers’ lessons observations 3) Video Coding and
Week 3
1-2 paragraph reflection 4) Lesson plan
1) Cluster student teachers’ lessons observations 2) paper on “Teachable Moments” observations
Week 4
3) Video Coding and 1-2 paragraph reflection 4) Lesson plan
Week 5 1) Cluster student teachers’ lessons observations 2) Student interview 3) Lesson plan
Take over the teaching of the classes assigned to you, send a lesson plan to your university
Week 6 – 13
supervisor each week for the lesson that will be observed by your university supervisor
1) Gradually turn your classes back to your mentor teacher, 2) Cluster student teachers’ lessons
Week 14
observations—reflect on the lessons using the digital dialogue prompt\nUniversity Policies
Honor Code
In keeping with the principles of the BYU Honor Code, students are expected to be honest in all of
their academic work. Academic honesty means, most fundamentally, that any work you present as
your own must in fact be your own work and not that of another. Violations of this principle may result
in a failing grade in the course and additional disciplinary action by the university. Students are also
expected to adhere to the Dress and Grooming Standards. Adherence demonstrates respect for yourself
and others and ensures an effective learning and working environment. It is the university's
expectation, and every instructor's expectation in class, that each student will abide by all Honor Code
standards. Please call the Honor Code Office at 422-2847 if you have questions about those standards.
Preventing & Responding to Sexual Misconduct
In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Brigham Young University
prohibits unlawful sex discrimination against any participant in its education programs or activities.
The university also prohibits sexual harassment-including sexual violence-committed by or against
students, university employees, and visitors to campus. As outlined in university policy, sexual
harassment, dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault, and stalking are considered forms of
"Sexual Misconduct" prohibited by the university.
University policy requires all university employees in a teaching, managerial, or supervisory role to
report all incidents of Sexual Misconduct that come to their attention in any way, including but not
limited to face-to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class discussion, email, text,
or social media post. Incidents of Sexual Misconduct should be reported to the Title IX Coordinator
at t9coordinator@byu.edu or (801) 422-8692. Reports may also be submitted through EthicsPoint
at https://titleix.byu.edu/report or 1-888-238-1062 (24-hours a day).
BYU offers confidential resources for those affected by Sexual Misconduct, including the university's
Victim Advocate, as well as a number of non-confidential resources and services that may be helpful.
Additional information about Title IX, the university's Sexual Misconduct Policy, reporting
requirements, and resources can be found at http://titleix.byu.edu or by contacting the university's Title
IX Coordinator.
Student Disability
Brigham Young University is committed to providing a working and learning atmosphere that
reasonably accommodates qualified persons with disabilities. If you have any disability which may
impair your ability to complete this course successfully, please contact the University Accessibility
Center (UAC), 2170 WSC or 422-2767. Reasonable academic accommodations are reviewed for all
students who have qualified, documented disabilities. The UAC can also assess students for learning,
attention, and emotional concerns. Services are coordinated with the student and instructor by the
UAC. If you need assistance or if you feel you have been unlawfully discriminated against on the basis
of disability, you may seek resolution through established grievance policy and procedures by
contacting the Equal Employment Office at 422-5895, D-285 ASB.\nTHE STATEMENT ON BELONGING
We are united by our common primary identity as children of God (Acts 17:29; Psalm 82:6)
and our commitment to the truths of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ (BYU Mission
Statement). We strive to create a community of belonging composed of students, faculty, and
staff whose hearts are knit together in love (Mosiah 18:21) where:
• All relationships reflect devout love of God and a loving, genuine concern for the
welfare of our neighbor (BYU Mission Statement);
• We value and embrace the variety of individual characteristics, life experiences and
circumstances, perspectives, talents, and gifts of each member of the community and the
richness and strength they bring to our community (1 Corinthians 12:12–27);
• Our interactions create and support an environment of belonging (Ephesians 2:19); and
• The full realization of each student’s divine potential is our central focus (BYU Mission
Statement).